.\" ============================================================================
.TH vsearch 1 "December 2, 2014" "version 1.0.1" "USER COMMANDS"
.\" ============================================================================
.SH NAME
vsearch \(em chimera detection, clustering, dereplication, masking, searching, shuffling and sorting of amplicons from metagenomic projects.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" left justified, ragged right
.ad l
Chimera detection:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --uchime_denovo \fIfastafile\fR (--chimeras |
--nonchimeras | --uchimealns | --uchimeout) \fIoutputfile\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR --uchime_ref \fIfastafile\fR (--chimeras | --nonchimeras
| --uchimealns | --uchimeout) \fIoutputfile\fR --db \fIfastafile\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Clustering:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR (--cluster_fast | --cluster_smallmem) \fIfastafile\fR
(--alnout | --blast6out | --centroids | --clusters | --msaout | --uc |
--userout) \fIoutputfile\fR --id \fIreal\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Dereplication:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --derep_fulllength \fIfastafile\fR (--output | --uc)
\fIoutputfile\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Masking:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --maskfasta \fIfastafile\fR --output \fIoutputfile\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Searching:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --usearch_global \fIfastafile\fR --db \fIfastafile\fR
(--alnout | --blast6out | --uc | --userout) \fIoutputfile\fR --id
\fIreal\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Shuffling:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --shuffle \fIfastafile\fR --output \fIoutputfile\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
Sorting:
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR (--sortbylength | --sortbysize) \fIfastafile\fR --output
\fIoutputfile\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.RE
.\" left and right justified (default)
.ad b 
.\" ============================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
Environmental or clinical molecular studies generate large volumes of
amplicons (e.g. SSU-rRNA sequences) that need to be dereplicated,
masked, sorted, searched, clustered or compared to reference
sequences. The aim of \fBvsearch\fR is to offer a all-in-one open
source tool to perform these tasks, using optimized algorithm
implementations and harvesting the full potential of modern computers,
thus providing fast and accurate data processing.
.PP
Nucleotide sequence comparisons is at the core of \fBvsearch\fR. To
speed up comparisons, \fBvsearch\fR implements an extremely
fast implementation of the
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm, making use of the Streaming SIMD
Extensions (SSE2) of modern x86-64 CPUs. If SSE2 instructions are not
available, \fBvsearch\fR exits with an error message.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Input
\fBvsearch\fR input is a fasta file containing one or several
nucleotide sequences. For each sequence, the sequence identifier is
defined as the string comprised between the ">" symbol and the first
space, or the end of the line, whichever comes first. Additionally, if
the line starts with ">[;]size=\fIinteger\fR;label", contains
">label;size=\fIinteger\fR;label" or ends with
">label;size=\fIinteger\fR[;]", \fBvsearch\fR will remove the pattern
[;]size=\fIinteger\fR[;] from the header and interpret \fIinteger\fR
as the number of occurrences (or abundance) of the sequence in the
study. That abundance information is used or created during chimera
detection, dereplication, sorting and searching.
.PP
The nucleotide sequence is defined as a string of IUPAC symbols
(ACGTURYSWKMDBHVN), starting after the end of the identifier line and
ending before the next identifier line, or the file end. \fBvsearch\fR
silently ignores ascii characters 9 to 13, and exits with an error
message if ascii characters 0 to 8, 14 to 31, "." or "-" are
present. All other ascii or non-ascii characters are stripped and
complained about in a non-blocking warning message.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR operations are case insensitive, except when soft masking is
activated. For --usearch_global (searching), --cluster_fast and
--cluster_smallmem (clustering), and --maskfasta (masking) commands,
the case is important if soft masking is used. Soft masking is
specified with the options "--dbmask soft" (for searching) or "--qmask
soft" (for searching, clustering and masking). When using soft
masking, lower case letters indicate masked symbols, while upper case
letters indicate regular symbols. Masked symbols are never included in
the unique \fIk\fR-mers used in searching. When soft masking is not
activated, all letters are converted to upper case internally and used
in result files.
.PP
When comparing sequences during chimera detection, dereplication,
searching and clustering, T and U are considered identical, regardless
of their case. If two symbols are non-identical, their alignment will
result in the negative mismatch score (default -4), except if one or
both of the symbols are ambiguous (RYSWKMDBHVN) in which case the
score is zero. Alignment of two identical ambiguous symbols (e.g. R vs
R) also receives a score of zero.
.PP
Optionally, \fBvsearch\fR can be compiled to accepted compressed fasta
files as input (gz and bzip2 formats).
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Options
\fBvsearch\fR recognizes a large number of command-line options. For
easier navigation, options are grouped below by theme (chimera detection,
clustering, dereplication, masking, shuffling, sorting, and
searching). We start with general options that apply to all themes.
.PP
General options:
.RS
.TP 9
.B --help
Display a short help and exit.
.TP
.B --version
Output version information and exit.
.TP
.BI --fasta_width\~ "positive integer"
Fasta files produced by \fBvsearch\fR are wrapped (sequences are
written on lines of \fIinteger\fR nucleotides, 80 by default). Set
that value to 0 to eliminate the wrapping.
.TP
.BI --maxseqlength\~ "positive integer"
All \fBvsearch\fR operations will discard sequences of length equal or
greater than \fIinteger\fR (50,000 nucleotides by default).
.TP
.BI --minseqlength\~ "positive integer"
All \fBvsearch\fR operations will discard sequences of length smaller
than \fIinteger\fR (1 nucleotide by default for sorting or shuffling,
32 nucleotides for clustering, dereplication or searching).
.TP
.B --notrunclabels
Do not truncate sequence labels at first space, use the full header in
output files.
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chimera detection options:
.PP
.RS
Chimera detection is based on a scoring function controlled by five
options (--dn, --mindiffs, --mindiv, --minh, --xn). Sequences are first
sorted by decreasing abundance (if available), and compared on their
\fIplus\fR strand only (case insensitive).
.PP
In \fIde novo\fR mode, input fasta file should present abundance
annotations (pattern [;]size=\fIinteger\fR[;] in the fasta
header). The input order influences the chimera detection, we
recommend to sort sequences by decreasing abundance (default of
--derep_fulllength command). If your sequence set needs to be sorted,
please see the --sortbysize command in the sorting section.
.PP
.TP 9
.BI --abskew \0real
When using --uchime_denovo, the abundance skew is used to distinguish
in a 3-way alignment which sequence is the chimera and which are the
parents. The assumption is that chimeras appeared later in the PCR
amplification process and are therefore less abundant than their
parents. The default value is 2.0, which means that the parents should
be at least 2 times more abundant than their chimera. Any positive
value greater than 1.0 can be used.
.TP
.BI --alignwidth\~ "positive integer"
Width of 3-way alignments in --uchimealns output. The default value is
80. Set to 0 to eliminate wrapping.
.TP
.BI --chimeras \0filename
Output chimeric sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format. Output
order may vary when using multiple threads.
.TP
.BI --db \0filename
When using --uchime_ref, detect chimeras using the fasta-formatted
reference sequences contained in \fIfilename\fR. Reference sequences
are assumed to be chimera-free. Chimeras will not be detected if their
parents (or sufficiently close relatives) are not present in the
database.
.TP
.BI --dn \0real
No vote pseudo-count (parameter \fIn\fR in the chimera scoring
function) (1.4).
.TP
.BI --mindiffs\~ "positive integer"
Minimum number of differences per segment (3).
.TP
.BI --mindiv \0real
Minimum divergence from closest parent (0.8).
.TP
.BI --minh \0real
Minimum score (h). Increasing this value tends to reduce the number of
false positives and to decrease sensitivity. Default value is
0.28. (value ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 included).
.TP
.BI --nonchimeras \0filename
Output non-chimeric sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta
format. Output order may vary when using multiple threads.
.TP
.B --self
When using --uchime_ref, ignore a reference sequence when its label
matches the label of the query sequence (useful to estimate
false-positive rate in reference sequences).
.TP
.B --selfid
When using --uchime_ref, ignore a reference sequence when its
nucleotide sequence is strictly identical with the query sequence.
.TP
.BI --threads\~ "positive integer"
Number of computation threads to use (1 to 256) with uchime_ref.
The number of threads
should be lesser or equal to the number of available CPU cores. The
default is to launch one thread per available logical core.
.TP
.BI --uchime_denovo \0filename
Detect chimeras present in the fasta-formatted \fIfilename\fR, without
external references (i.e. \fIde novo\fR). Automatically sort the
sequences in \fIfilename\fR by decreasing abundance and length
beforehand. Multithreading is not supported.
.TP
.BI --uchime_ref \0filename
Detect chimeras present in the fasta-formatted \fIfilename\fR by
comparing them with reference sequences (option --db). Multithreading
is supported.
.TP
.BI --uchimealns \0filename
Write 3-way global alignments (parentA, parentB, chimera) to
\fIfilename\fR using a human-readable format. Use --alignwidth to modify
alignment length. Output order may vary when using multiple threads.
.TP
.BI --uchimeout \0filename
Write chimera detection results to \fIfilename\fR using the uchime
tab-separated format of 18 fields (see the list below). Use
--uchimeout5 to use a format compatible with usearch v5 and earlier
versions. Rows output order may vary when using multiple threads.
.RS
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
score: higher score means a more likely chimeric alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
Q: query sequence label.
.IP \n+[step].
A: parent A sequence label.
.IP \n+[step].
B: parent B sequence label.
.IP \n+[step].
T: top parent sequence label (i.e. parent most similar to the
query). That field is removed when using --uchimeout5.
.IP \n+[step].
idQM: percentage of similarity of query (Q) and model (M)
constructed as a part of parent A and a part of parent B.
.IP \n+[step].
idQA: percentage of similarity of query (Q) and parent A.
.IP \n+[step].
idQB: percentage of similarity of query (Q) and parent B.
.IP \n+[step].
idAB: percentage of similarity of parent A and parent B.
.IP \n+[step].
idQT: percentage of similarity of query (Q) and top parent (T).
.IP \n+[step].
LY: yes votes in the left part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
LN: no votes in the left part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
LA: abstain votes in the left part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
RY: yes votes in the right part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
RN: no votes in the right part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
RA: abstain votes in the right part of the model.
.IP \n+[step].
div: divergence, defined as (idQM - idQT).
.IP \n+[step].
YN: query is chimeric (Y), or not (N), or is a borderline case
(?).
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B --uchimeout5
When using --uchimeout, write chimera detection results using a
tab-separated format of 17 fields (drop the 5th field of --uchimeout),
compatible with usearch version 5 and earlier versions.
.TP
.BI --xn \0real
No vote weight (parameter beta) (8.0).
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clustering options:
.RS
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR implements a single-pass, greedy star-clustering
algorithm, similar to the algorithms implemented in usearch, DNAclust
and sumaclust. Important parameters are the global clustering
threshold (--id) and the pairwise identity definition (--iddef).
.TP 9
.BI --centroids \0filename
Output cluster centroid sequences to \fIfilename\fR file, in fasta
format. The centroid is the sequence that seeded the cluster (i.e. the
first sequence of the cluster).
.TP
.BI --cluster_fast \0filename
Clusterize the fasta sequences in \fIfilename\fR, automatically
perform a sorting by decreasing sequence length beforehand.
.TP
.BI --cluster_smallmem \0filename
Clusterize the fasta sequences in \fIfilename\fR without automatically
modifying their order beforehand. Sequence are expected to be sorted
by decreasing sequence length, unless --usersort is used.
.TP
.BI --clusters \0string
Output each cluster to a separate fasta file using the prefix
\fIstring\fR and a ticker (0, 1, 2, etc.) to construct the path and filenames.
.TP
.BI --consout \0filename
Output cluster consensus sequences to \fIfilename\fR. For each
cluster, a multiple alignment is computed, and a consensus sequence is
constructed by taking the majority symbol (nucleotide or gap) from
each column of the alignment. Columns containing a majority of gaps
are skipped, except for terminal gaps. Use --construncate to take
terminal gaps into account (not implemented yet).
.\" .TP
.\" .B --construncate
.\" when using the --consout option to build consensus sequences, do not
.\" ignore terminal gaps. That option skips terminal columns if they
.\" contain a majority of gaps, yielding shorter consensus sequences than
.\" when using --consout alone.
.TP
.BI --id \0real
Do not add the target to the cluster if the pairwise identity with the
centroid is lower than \fIreal\fR (value ranging from 0.0 to 1.0
included). The pairwise identity is defined as the number of (matching
columns) / (alignment length - terminal gaps). That definition can be
modified by --iddef.
.TP
.BI --iddef\~ "0|1|2|3|4"
Change the pairwise identity definition used in --id. Values accepted
are:
.RS
.RS
.nr step 0 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
CD-HIT definition using shortest sequence as numerator.
.IP \n+[step].
edit distance: (matching columns) / (alignment length).
.IP \n+[step].
edit distance excluding terminal gaps (default value).
.IP \n+[step].
Marine Biological Lab definition counting each extended gap as a
single difference.
.IP \n+[step].
BLAST definition, equivalent to --iddef 2 in a context of global
pairwise alignment.
.RE
.RE
.TP
.BI --msaout \0filename
Output a multiple sequence alignment and a consensus sequence for each
cluster to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format. The consensus sequence is
constructed by taking the majority symbol (nucleotide or gap) from
each column of the alignment. Columns containing a majority of gaps
are skipped, except for terminal gaps.
.TP
.BI --qmask\~ "none|dust|soft"
Mask simple repeats and low-complexity regions in sequences using the
\fIdust\fR or the \fIsoft\fR algorithms, or do not mask
(\fInone\fR). Warning, when using \fIsoft\fR masking, clustering
becomes case sensitive. The default is to mask using \fIdust\fR.
.TP
.B --sizein
Take into account the abundance annotations present in the input fasta
file (search for the pattern "[>;]size=\fIinteger\fR[;]" in sequence
headers).
.TP
.B --sizeout
Add abundance annotations to the output fasta files (add the pattern
";size=\fIinteger\fR;" to sequence headers). If --sizein is specified,
abundance annotations are reported to output files, and each cluster
centroid receives a new abundance value corresponding to the total
abundance of the amplicons included in the cluster (--centroids
option). If --sizein is not specified, input abundances are set to 1
for amplicons, and to the number of amplicons per cluster for
centroids.
.TP
.BI --strand\~ "plus|both"
When comparing sequences with the cluster seed, check the \fIplus\fR
strand only (default) or check \fIboth\fR strands.
.TP
.BI --threads\~ "positive integer"
Number of computation threads to use (1 to 256). The number of threads
should be less or equal to the number of available CPU cores. The
default is to launch one thread per available logical core.
.TP
.BI --uc \0filename
Output clustering results in \fIfilename\fR using a uclust-like
format. See <http://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual/ucout.html> for a
description of the format.
.TP
.B --usersort
When using --cluster_smallmem, allow any sequence input order, not
just a decreasing length ordering.
.TP
Most searching options also apply to clustering:
.br
--alnout, --blast6out, --userout, --userfields, fastapairs, --matched,
--notmatched, --maxaccept, --maxreject, score filtering, gap penalties, masking. (see the Searching section).
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dereplication options:
.RS
.TP 9
.BI --derep_fulllength \0filename
Merge strictly identical sequences contained in
\fIfilename\fR. Identical sequences are defined as having the same
length and the same string of nucleotides (case insensitive, T and U
are considered the same). As \fBvsearch\fR needs to read
\fIfilename\fR twice, \fIfilename\fR must be a real file, not a
stream.
.TP
.BI --maxuniquesize\~ "positive integer"
Discard sequences with an abundance value greater than \fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --minuniquesize\~ "positive integer"
Discard sequences with an abundance value smaller than \fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --output \0filename
Write the dereplicated sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format
and sorted by decreasing abundance. Identical sequences receive the
header of the first sequence of their group. If --sizeout is used, the
number of occurrences (i.e. abundance) of each sequence is indicated
at the end of their fasta header using the pattern
";size=\fIinteger\fR;".
.TP
.B --sizein
Take into account the abundance annotations present in the input fasta
file (search for the pattern "[>;]size=\fIinteger\fR[;]" in sequence
headers).
.TP
.B --sizeout
Add abundance annotations to the output fasta file (add the pattern
";size=\fIinteger\fR;" to sequence headers).  If --sizein is specified,
each unique sequence receives a new abundance value corresponding to
its total abundance (sum of the abundances of its occurrences). If
--sizein is not specified, input abundances are set to 1, and each
unique sequence receives a new abundance value corresponding to its
number of occurrences in the input file.
.TP
.BI --strand\~ "plus|both"
When searching for strictly identical sequences, check the \fIplus\fR
strand only (default) or check \fIboth\fR strands.
.TP
.BI --topn\~ "positive integer"
Output only the top \fIinteger\fR sequences (i.e. the most abundant).
.TP
.BI --uc \0filename
Output dereplication results in \fIfilename\fR using a uclust-like
format. See <http://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual/ucout.html> for a
description of the format. In the context of dereplication, the option
--uc_allhits has no effect.
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Masking options:
.RS
.PP
An input sequence can be composed of lower- or uppercase
nucleotides. Lowercase nucleotides are silently set to uppercase
before masking, unless the --qmask soft option is used. Here are the
results of combined masking options --qmask (or --dbmask for database
sequences) and --hardmask, assuming each input sequences contains both
lower and uppercase nucleotides:
.PP
.TS
tab(:);
c c c
l l l.
qmask:hardmask:action
_
none:off:no masking, all symbols uppercased
none:on:no masking, all symbols uppercased
dust:off:masked symbols lowercased, others uppercased
dust:on:masked symbols changed to Ns, others uppercased
soft:off:lowercase symbols masked, no case changes
soft:on:lowercase symbols masked and changed to Ns
.TE
.PP
.TP 9
.B --hardmask
Mask low-complexity regions by replacing them with Ns instead of
setting them to lower case.
.TP
.BI --maskfasta \0filename
Mask simple repeats and low-complexity regions in sequences contained
in \fIfilename\fR. The default is to mask using \fIdust\fR (use
--qmask to modify that behavior).
.TP
.BI --output \0filename
Write the masked sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.BI --qmask\~ "none|dust|soft"
Mask simple repeats and low-complexity regions in sequences using the
\fIdust\fR or the \fIsoft\fR algorithms, or do not mask
(\fInone\fR). The default is to mask using \fIdust\fR.
.TP
.BI --threads\~ "positive integer"
Number of computation threads to use (1 to 256). The number of threads
should be lesser or equal to the number of available CPU cores. The
default is to launch one thread per available logical core.
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Searching options:
.RS
.TP 9
.BI --alnout \0filename
Write pairwise global alignments to \fIfilename\fR using a
human-readable format. Use --rowlen to modify alignment length. Output
order may vary when using multiple threads.
.TP
.BI --blast6out \0filename
Write search results to \fIfilename\fR using a blast-like
tab-separated format of twelve fields (listed below), with one line
per query-target matching (or lack of matching if --output_no_hits is
used). Output order may vary when using multiple threads. A similar
output can be obtain with --userout \fIfilename\fR and --userfields
query+target+id+alnlen+mism+opens+qlo+qhi+tlo+thi+evalue+bits.
A complete list and description is available in the section "Userfields"
of this manual.
.RS
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
\fIquery\fR: query label.
.IP \n+[step].
\fItarget\fR: target (database sequence) label. The field is set to
"*" if there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIid\fR: percentage of identity (real value ranging from 0.0 to
100.0). The percentage identity is defined as 100 * (matching columns)
/ (alignment length - terminal gaps). See fields id0 to id4 for other
definitions.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIalnlen\fR: length of the query-target alignment (number of
columns). The field is set to 0 if there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fImism\fR: number of mismatches in the alignment (zero or positive
integer value).
.IP \n+[step].
\fIopens\fR: number of columns containing a gap opening (zero or
positive integer value).
.IP \n+[step].
\fIqlo\fR: first nucleotide of the query aligned with the
target. Nucleotide numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if
there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIqhi\fR: last nucleotide of the query aligned with the
target. Nucleotide numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if
there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fItlo\fR: first nucleotide of the target aligned with the
query. Nucleotide numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if
there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIthi\fR: last nucleotide of the target aligned with the
query. Nucleotide numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if
there is no alignment.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIevalue\fR: expectancy-value (not computed for nucleotide
alignments). Always set to -1.
.IP \n+[step].
\fIbits\fR: bit score (not computed for nucleotide
alignments). Always set to 0.
.RE
.RE
.TP
.BI --db \0filename
Compare query sequences (specified with --usearch_global)
to the fasta-formatted target sequences contained in \fIfilename\fR,
using global pairwise alignment.
.TP
.BI --dbmask\~ "none|dust|soft"
Mask simple repeats and low-complexity regions in target database
sequences using the \fIdust\fR or the \fIsoft\fR algorithms, or do not
mask (\fInone\fR). Warning, when using \fIsoft\fR masking search
commands become case sensitive. The default is to mask using
\fIdust\fR.
.TP
.BI --dbmatched \0filename
Write database target sequences matching at least one query sequence
to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format. If the option --sizeout is used,
the number of queries that matched each target sequence is indicated
using the pattern ";size=\fIinteger\fR;".
.TP
.BI --dbnotmatched \0filename
Write database target sequences not matching query sequences to
\fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.BI --fastapairs \0filename
Write pairwise alignments of query and target sequences to
\fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.B --fulldp
Dummy option. To maximize search sensitivity, \fBvsearch\fR uses a
8-way 16-bit SIMD vectorized full dynamic programming algorithm
(Needleman-Wunsch), whether or not --fulldp is specified.
.TP
.BI --gapext \0string
Set penalties for a gap extension. See --gapopen for a complete
description of the penalty declaration system. The default is to
initialize the six gap extending penalties using a penalty of 2 for
extending internal gaps and a penalty of 1 for extending terminal
gaps, in both query and target sequences (i.e. 2I/1E).
.TP
.BI --gapopen \0string
Set penalties for a gap opening. A gap opening can occur in six
different contexts: in the query (Q) or in the target (T) sequence, at
the left (L) or right (R) extremity of the sequence, or inside the
sequence (I). Sequence symbols (Q and T) can be combined with location
symbols (L, I, and R), and numerical values to declare penalties for
all possible contexts: aQL/bQI/cQR/dTL/eTI/fTR, where abcdef are zero
or positive integers, and "/" is used as a separator.
.br
To simplify declarations, the location symbols (L, I, and R) can be
combined, the symbol (E) can be used to treat both extremities (L and
R) equally, and the symbols Q and T can be ommited to treat query and
target sequences equally. For instance, the default is to declare a
penalty of 20 for opening internal gaps and a penalty of 2 for opening
terminal gaps (left or right), in both query and target sequences
(i.e. 20I/2E). If only a numerical value is given, without any
sequence or location symbol, then the penalty applies to all gap
openings. To declare an infinite penalty value, the symbol "*" can be
used to indicate that gap openings are forbidden in that context.
.br
\fBvsearch\fR always initializes the six gap opening
penalties using the default parameters (20I/2E). The user is then free
to declare only the values he/she wants to modify. The \fIstring\fR is
scanned from left to right, accepted symbols are (0123456789/LIREQT*),
and later values override previous values.
.br
Please note that \fBvsearch\fR, in contrast to usearch, only allows integer
gap penalties. Because the lowest gap penalties are 0.5 by default
in usearch, all default scores and gap penalties in \fBvsearch\fR
have been doubled in order to obtain similar alignments.
.TP
.B --hardmask
Mask low-complexity regions by replacing them with Ns instead of
setting them to lower case. For more information, please see the
Masking section.
.TP
.BI --id \0real
Reject the sequence match if the pairwise identity is lower than
\fIreal\fR (value ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 included). The search
process sorts target sequences by decreasing number of \fIk\fR-mers
they have in common with the query sequence, using that information as
a proxy for sequence similarity. That efficient pre-filtering will
also prevent pairwise alignments with weakly matching targets, as
there needs to be at least 6 shared \fIk\fR-mers to start the pairwise
alignment, and at least one out of every 16 \fIk\fR-mers from the
query needs to match the target. Consequently, using values lower than
--id 0.5 is not likely to capture more weakly matching targets. The
pairwise identity is by default defined as the number of (matching columns) /
(alignment length - terminal gaps). That definition can be modified by
--iddef.
.TP
.BI --iddef\~ "0|1|2|3|4"
Change the pairwise identity definition used in --id. Values accepted
are:
.RS
.RS
.nr step 0 1
.IP \n[step]. 4
CD-HIT definition using shortest sequence as numerator.
.IP \n+[step].
edit distance.
.IP \n+[step].
edit distance excluding terminal gaps (default value of --id).
.IP \n+[step].
Marine Biological Lab definition counting each extended gap as a
single difference.
.IP \n+[step].
BLAST definition, equivalent to --iddef 2 in a context of global
pairwise alignment.
.RE
.RE
.PP
The option --userfields accepts the fields id0 to id4, in addition to
the field id, to report the pairwise identity values corresponding to
the different definitions.
.TP
.BI --idprefix\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the first \fIinteger\fR nucleotides do
not match the query sequence.
.TP
.BI --idsuffix\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the last \fIinteger\fR nucleotides do
not match the query sequence.
.TP
.B --leftjust
Reject the target sequence if the alignment begins with gaps.
.TP
.BI --match\~ "integer"
Score assigned to a match (i.e. identical nucleotides) in the pairwise
alignment. The default value is 2.
.TP
.BI --matched \0filename
Write query sequences matching database target sequences to
\fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.BI --maxaccepts\~ "positive integer"
Maximum number of hits to accept before stopping the search. The
default value is 1. This option works in pair with maxrejects. The
search process sorts target sequences by decreasing number of
\fIk\fR-mers they have in common with the query sequence, using that
information as a proxy for sequence similarity. If the first target
sequence passes the acceptation criteria, it is accepted as best hit
and the search process stops for that query. If maxaccepts is set to a
higher value, more hits are accepted. If maxaccepts and maxrejects are
both set to 0, the complete database is searched.
.TP
.BI --maxdiffs\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the alignment contains at least
\fIinteger\fR substitutions, insertions or deletions.
.TP
.BI --maxgaps\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the alignment contains at least
\fIinteger\fR insertions or deletions.
.TP
.BI --maxhits\~ "positive integer"
Maximum number of hits to show once the search is terminated (hits are
sorted by decreasing identity). Unlimited by default value. \fBIt
applies to alnout, blast6out, uc, userout, fastapairs\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxid \0real
Reject the target sequence if its percentage of identity with the
query is greater than \fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxqsize\~ "positive integer"
Reject query sequences with an abundance greater than
\fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxqt \0real
Reject if the query/target sequence length ratio is greater than \fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxrejects\~ "positive integer"
Maximum number of non-matching target sequences to consider before
stopping the search. The default value is 32. This option works in
pair with maxaccepts. The search process sorts target sequences by
decreasing number of \fIk\fR-mers they have in common with the query
sequence, using that information as a proxy for sequence
similarity. If none of the first 32 examined target sequences pass the
acceptation criteria, the search process stops for that query (no
hit). If maxrejects is set to a higher value, more target sequences
are considered. If maxaccepts and maxrejects are both set to 0, the
complete database is searched.
.TP
.BI --maxsizeratio \0real
Reject if the query/target abundance ratio is greater than
\fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxsl \0real
Reject if the shorter/longer sequence length ratio is
greater than \fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --maxsubs\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the alignment contains more than
\fIinteger\fR substitutions.
.TP
.BI --mid \0real
Reject the alignment if the percentage of identity is lower than
\fIreal\fR (ignoring all gaps, internal and terminal).
.TP
.BI --mincols\~ "positive integer"
Reject the target sequence if the alignment length is shorter than
\fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --minqt \0real
Reject if the query/target sequence length ratio is lower than
\fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --minsizeratio \0real
Reject if the query/target abundance ratio is lower than \fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --minsl \0real
Reject if the shorter/longer sequence length ratio is lower than
\fIreal\fR.
.TP
.BI --mintsize\~ "positive integer"
Reject target sequences with an abundance lower than \fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --mismatch\~ "integer"
Score assigned to a mismatch (i.e. different nucleotides) in the
pairwise alignment. The default value is -4.
.TP
.BI --notmatched \0filename
Write query sequences not matching database target sequences to
\fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.B --output_no_hits
Write both matching and non-matching queries to --alnout, --blast6out,
and --userout output files (--uc and --uc_allhits output files always
feature non-matching queries). Non-matching queries are labelled "No
hits" in --alnout files.
.TP
.BI --qmask\~ "none|dust|soft"
Mask simple repeats and low-complexity regions in query sequences
using the \fIdust\fR or the \fIsoft\fR algorithms, or do not mask
(\fInone\fR). Warning, when using \fIsoft\fR masking search commands
become case sensitive. The default is to mask using \fIdust\fR.
.TP
.BI --query_cov \0real
Reject if the fraction of the query aligned to the target sequence is
lower than \fIreal\fR. The query coverage is computed as
(matches + mismatches) / query sequence length. Internal or terminal
gaps are not taken into account.
.TP
.B --rightjust
Reject the target sequence if the alignment ends with gaps.
.TP
.BI --rowlen\~ "positive integer"
Width of alignment lines in --alnout output. The default value is
64. Set to 0 to eliminate wrapping.
.TP
.B --self
Reject the alignment if the query and target labels are identical.
.TP
.B --selfid
Reject the alignment if the query and target sequences are strictly
identical.
.TP
.B --sizeout
Add abundance annotations to the output of the option --dbmatched
(using the pattern ";size=\fIinteger\fR;").
.TP
.BI --strand\~ "plus|both"
When searching for similar sequences, check the \fIplus\fR strand only
(default) or check \fIboth\fR strands.
.TP
.BI --target_cov \0real
Reject if the fraction of the target sequence aligned to the query
sequence is lower than \fIreal\fR. The target coverage is computed as
(matches + mismatches) / target sequence length.
Internal or terminal gaps are not taken into account.
.TP
.BI --threads\~ "positive integer"
Number of computation threads to use (1 to 256). The number of threads
should be lesser or equal to the number of available CPU cores. The
default is to launch one thread per available logical core.
.TP
.B --top_hits_only
Output only the hits with the highest percentage of identity with the
query.
.TP
.BI --uc \0filename
Output searching results in \fIfilename\fR using a uclust-like
format. See <http://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual/ucout.html> for a
description of the format. Output order may vary when using multiple
threads.
.TP
.B --uc_allhits
When using the --uc option, show all hits, not just the top hit for
each query.
.TP
.BI --usearch_global \0filename
Compare target sequences (--db) to the fasta-formatted query sequences
contained in \fIfilename\fR, using global pairwise alignment.
.TP
.BI --userfields \0string
When using --userout, select and order the fields written to the
output file. Fields are separated by "+" (e.g. query+target+id). See
the "Userfields" section for a complete list of fields.
.TP
.BI --userout \0filename
Write user-defined tab-separated output to \fIfilename\fR. Select the
fields with the option --userfields. Output order may vary when using
multiple threads. If --userfields is empty or not present,
\fIfilename\fR is empty.
.TP
.BI --weak_id \0real
Show hits with percentage of identity of at least \fIreal\fR, without
terminating the search. A normal search stops as soon as enough hits
are found (as defined by --maxaccepts, --maxrejects, and --id). As
--weak_id reports weak hits that are not deduced from --maxaccepts,
high --id values can be used, hence preserving both speed and
sensitivity. Logically, \fIreal\fR must be smaller than the value
indicated by --id.
.TP
.BI --wordlength\~ "positive integer"
Length of words (i.e. \fIk\fR-mers) for database indexing. The range
of possible values goes from 3 to 15, but values near 8 are generally
recommended. Longer words may reduce the sensitivity for weak
similarities, but can increase accuracy. On the other hand, shorter
words may increase sensitivity, but can reduce accuracy. Computation
time will generally increase with shorter words and decrease with
longer words. Memory requirements for a part of the index increase
with a factor of 4 each time word length increases by one nucleotide,
and this generally becomes significant for long words (12 or
more). The default value is 8.
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shuffling options:
.RS
.TP 9
.BI --output \0filename
Write the shuffled sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.BI --seed\~ "positive integer"
When shuffling sequence order, use \fIinteger\fR as seed. A given seed
will always produce the same output order (useful for
replicability). Set to 0 to use a pseudo-random seed (default
behavior).
.TP
.BI --shuffle \0filename
Pseudo-randomly shuffle the order of sequences contained in
\fIfilename\fR.
.TP
.BI --topn\~ "positive integer"
Output only the top \fIinteger\fR sequences.
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sorting options:
.RS
To obtain a stable sorting order, fasta entries are sorted by
decreasing abundance (--sortbysize) or sequence length
(--sortbylength), and by sequence label increasing alpha-numerical
order (assuming all sequences have unique labels). The same applies to
the automatic sorting performed during chimera checking
(--uchime_denovo), dereplication (--derep_fulllength), and clustering
(--cluster_fast).
.PP
.TP 9
.BI --maxsize\~ "positive integer"
When using --sortbysize, discard sequences with an abundance value
greater than \fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --minsize\~ "positive integer"
When using --sortbysize, discard sequences with an abundance value
smaller than \fIinteger\fR.
.TP
.BI --output \0filename
Write the sorted sequences to \fIfilename\fR, in fasta format.
.TP
.BI --relabel \0string
Relabel sequence using the prefix \fIstring\fR and a ticker (1, 2, 3,
etc.) to construct the new headers. Use --sizeout to conserve the
abundance annotations.
.TP
.B --sizeout
When using --relabel, report abundance annotations to the output fasta
file (using the pattern ";size=\fIinteger\fR;").
.TP
.BI --sortbylength \0filename
Sort by decreasing length the sequences contained in
\fIfilename\fR. See the general options --minseqlength and
--maxseqlength to eliminate short and long sequences.
.TP
.BI --sortbysize \0filename
Sort by decreasing abundance the sequences contained in \fIfilename\fR
(the pattern "[>;]size=\fIinteger\fR[;]" has to be present). See the
options --minsize and --maxsize to eliminate rare and dominant
sequences.
.TP
.BI --topn\~ "positive integer"
Output only the top \fIinteger\fR sequences (i.e. the longest or the
most abundant).
.RE
.PP
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Userfields (fields accepted by the --userfields option):
.RS
.TP 9
.B aln
Print a string of M (match), D (delete, i.e. a gap in the query) and I
(insert, i.e. a gap in the target) representing the pairwise
alignment. Empty field if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B alnlen
Print the length of the query-target alignment (number of
columns). The field is set to 0 if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B bits
Bit score (not computed for nucleotide alignments). Always set to 0.
.TP
.B caln
Compact representation of the pairwise alignment using the CIGAR
format (Compact Idiosyncratic Gapped Alignment Report): M (match), D
(deletion) and I (insertion). Empty field if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B evalue
E-value (not computed for nucleotide alignments). Always set to -1.
.TP
.B exts
Number of columns containing a gap extension (zero or positive integer
value).
.TP
.B gaps
Number of columns containing a gap (zero or positive integer value).
.TP
.B id
Percentage of identity (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0). The
percentage identity is defined as 100 * (matching columns) /
(alignment length - terminal gaps).
.TP
.B id0
CD-HIT definition of the percentage of identity, using the shortest
sequence in the pairwise alignment as numerator (real value ranging
from 0.0 to 100.0).
.TP
.B id1
The percentage of identity (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0) is
defined as the edit distance: 100 * (matching columns) / (alignment
length).
.TP
.B id2
The percentage of identity (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0) is
defined as the edit distance, excluding terminal gaps. The field id2 is
an alias for the field id.
.TP
.B id3
Marine Biological Lab definition of the percentage of identity (real
value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0), counting each extended gap as a
single difference.
.TP
.B id4
BLAST definition of the percentage of identity (real value ranging
from 0.0 to 100.0), equivalent to --iddef 2 in a context of global
pairwise alignment.
.TP
.B ids
Number of matches in the alignment (zero or positive integer value).
.TP
.B mism
Number of mismatches in the alignment (zero or positive integer
value).
.TP
.B opens
Number of columns containing a gap opening (zero or positive integer
value).
.TP
.B pairs
Number of columns containing only nucleotides. That value corresponds
to the length of the alignment minus the gap-containing columns (zero
or positive integer value).
.TP
.B pctgaps
Number of columns containing gaps expressed as a percentage of the
alignment length (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0).
.TP
.B pctpv
Percentage of positive columns. When working with nucleotide
sequences, this is equivalent to the percentage of matches (real value
ranging from 0.0 to 100.0).
.TP
.B pv
Number of positive columns. When working with nucleotide sequences,
this is equivalent to the number of matches (zero or positive integer
value).
.TP
.B qcov
Fraction of the query sequence that is aligned with the target
sequence (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0). The query coverage is
computed as 100.0 * (matches + mismatches) / query sequence length.
Internal or terminal gaps are not taken into account. The
field is set to 0.0 if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B qframe
Query frame (-3 to +3). That field only concerns coding sequences and
is not computed by \fBvsearch\fR. Always set to +0.
.TP
.B qhi
Last nucleotide of the query aligned with the target. Nucleotide
numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if there is no
alignment.
.TP
.B ql
Query sequence length (positive integer value). The field is set to 0
if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B qlo
First nucleotide of the query aligned with the target. Nucleotide
numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if there is no
alignment.
.TP
.B qrow
Print the sequence of the query segment as seen in the pairwise
alignment (i.e. with gap insertions if need be). Empty field if there
is no alignment.
.TP
.B qs
Query segment length. Always equal to query sequence length.
.\" The meaning of that field is not clear to us. 
.TP
.B qstrand
Query strand orientation (+ or - for nucleotide sequences). Empty
field if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B query
Query label.
.TP
.B raw
Raw alignment score (negative, null or positive integer value). The
score is the sum of match rewards minus mismatch penalties, gap
openings and gap extensions. The field is set to 0 if there is no
alignment.
.TP
.B target
Target label. The field is set to "*" if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B tcov
Fraction of the target sequence that is aligned with the query
sequence (real value ranging from 0.0 to 100.0). The target coverage
is computed as 100.0 * (matches + mismatches) / target sequence length.
Internal or terminal gaps are not taken into account.
The field is set to 0.0 if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B tframe
Target frame (-3 to +3). That field only concerns coding sequences and
is not computed by \fBvsearch\fR. Always set to +0.
.TP
.B thi
Last nucleotide of the target aligned with the query. Nucleotide
numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if there is no
alignment.
.TP
.B tl
Target sequence length (positive integer value). The field is set to 0
if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B tlo
First nucleotide of the target aligned with the query. Nucleotide
numbering starts from 1. The field is set to 0 if there is no
alignment.
.TP
.B trow
Print the sequence of the target segment as seen in the pairwise
alignment (i.e. with gap insertions if need be). Empty field if there
is no alignment.
.TP
.B ts
Target segment length. Always equal to target sequence length. The
field is set to 0 if there is no alignment.
.TP
.B tstrand
Target strand orientation (+ or - for nucleotide sequences). Always
set to "+", so reverse strand matches have tstrand "+" and qstrand
"-". Empty field if there is no alignment.
.RE
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH DELIBERATE CHANGES
If you are a usearch user, our objective is to make you feel at
home. That's why \fBvsearch\fR was designed to behave like usearch, to
some extent. Like any complex software, usearch is not free from
quirks and inconsistencies. We decided not to reproduce some of them,
and for complete transparency, to document here the deliberate changes
we made.
.PP
During a search with usearch, when using the options --blast6out and
--output_no_hits, for queries with no match the number of fields
reported is 13, where it should be 12. This is corrected in
\fBvsearch\fR.
.PP
The fields qlo, qhi, tlo, thi and raw of the --userfields option are
not informative in usearch. This is corrected in \fBvsearch\fR.
.PP
In usearch, when using the option --output_no_hits, queries that
receive no match are reported in blast6out file, but not in the
alignment output file. This is corrected in \fBvsearch\fR.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR reintroduces with --iddef alternative pairwise identity
definitions that were removed from usearch.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR extends the --topn option to sorting commands.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR extends the --sizein option to dereplication
(--derep_fulllength) and clustering (--cluster_fast).
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR treats T and U as identical nucleotides for
dereplication.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR sorting is stabilized by using sequence labels as
secondary keys.
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH NOVELTIES
\fBvsearch\fR introduces new options not present in usearch. They are
described in the "Options" section of this manual. Here is a short
list:
.IP - 2
alignwidth
.IP -
fasta_width
.IP -
iddef
.IP -
maxuniquesize
.IP -
shuffle
.PP
.\" ============================================================================
.SH EXAMPLES
Cluster with a 97% similarity threshold, collect cluster centroids,
and write cluster descriptions using a uclust-like format:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --cluster_fast \fIqueries.fas\fR --id 0.97 --centroids
\fIcentroids.fas\fR --uc \fIclusters.uc\fR
.RE
.PP
Dereplicate the sequences contained in queries.fas, take into account
the abundance information already present, write unwrapped sequences
to output with the new abundance information, discard all sequences
with an abundance of 1:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --derep_fulllength \fIqueries.fas\fR --output
\fIqueries_masked.fas\fR --sizein --sizeout --fasta_width 0
--minuniquesize 2
.RE
.PP
Mask simple repeats and low complexity regions in the input fasta file
(masked regions are lowercased), and write the results to the output
file:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --maskfasta \fIqueries.fas\fR --output
\fIqueries_masked.fas\fR --qmask dust
.RE
.PP
Sort by decreasing abundance the sequences contained in queries.fas
(using the "size=\fIinteger\fR" information), relabel the sequences
while preserving the abundance information (with --sizeout), keep only
sequences with an abundance equal to or greater than 2:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --sortbysize \fIqueries.fas\fR --output
\fIqueries_sorted.fas\fR --relabel sampleA_ --sizeout --minsize 2
.RE
.PP
Search queries in a reference database, with a 80%-similarity
threshold, take terminal gaps into account when calculating pairwise
similarities:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --usearch_global \fIqueries.fas\fR --db
\fIreferences.fas\fR --alnout \fIresults.aln\fR --id 0.8 --iddef 1
.RE
.PP
Search a sequence dataset against itself (ignore self hits), get all
matches with at least 60% identity, and collect results in a
blast-like tab-separated format:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --usearch_global \fIqueries.fas\fR --db
\fIqueries.fas\fR --id 0.6 --self --blast6out \fIresults.blast6\fR
--maxaccepts 0 --maxrejects 0
.RE
.PP
Shuffle the input fasta file (change the order of sequences) in a
repeatable fashion (fixed seed), and write unwrapped fasta sequences
to the output file:
.PP
.RS
\fBvsearch\fR --shuffle \fIqueries.fas\fR --output
\fIqueries_shuffled.fas\fR --seed 13 --fasta_width 0
.RE
.PP
.\" 
.\" ============================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Implementation by Torbjørn Rognes and Tomas Flouri, documentation by Frédéric Mahé.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Submit suggestions and bug-reports at
<https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/issues>, send a pull request on
<https://github.com/torognes/vsearch>, or compose a friendly or
curmudgeont e-mail to Torbjørn Rognes <torognes@ifi.uio.no>.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH AVAILABILITY
Source code and binaries are available at <https://github.com/torognes/vsearch>.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2014 Torbjørn Rognes and collaborators.
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
Affero General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
License along with this program.  If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR includes code from Google's CityHash project by Geoff
Pike and Jyrki Alakuijala, providing some excellent hash functions
available under a MIT license.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR includes code derived from Tatusov and Lipman's DUST
program that is in the public domain.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR binaries may include code from the zlib library,
copyright Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler.
.PP
\fBvsearch\fR binaries may include code from the bzip2 library,
copyright Julian R. Seward.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBswipe\fR, an extremely fast pairwise local (Smith-Waterman)
database search tool by Torbjørn Rognes, available at
<https://github.com/torognes/swipe>.
.PP
\fBswarm\fR, a fast and accurate amplicon clustering method by
Frédéric Mahé and Torbjørn Rognes, available at
<https://github.com/torognes/swarm>.
.\" ============================================================================
.SH VERSION HISTORY
New features and important modifications of \fBvsearch\fR (short lived
or minor bug releases may not be mentioned):
.RS
.TP
.BR v1.0.0\~ "released November 28th, 2014"
First public release.
.TP
.BR v1.0.1\~ "released December 1st, 2014"
Bug fixes (sortbysize, semicolon after size annotation in headers)
and minor changes
(labels as secondary sort key for most sorts, treat T and U as identical
for dereplication, only output size in dbmatched file if sizeout specified).
.LP
.\" ============================================================================
.\" TODO:
.\" - "--uc_allhits": how is it working for clustering?
.\"
.\" NOTES
.\" visualize and output to pdf
.\" man -l vsearch.1
.\" man -t ./doc/vsearch.1 | ps2pdf - > ./doc/vsearch_manual.pdf
.\"
.\" INSTALL (sysadmin)
.\" gzip -c vsearch.1 > vsearch.1.gz
.\" mv vsearch.1.gz /usr/share/man/man1/
